and then we're talking to Robert Greer.
Bob, I won't just chat, okay, and I know a lot about your background, but why don't you give me a little bit of the biography?
You graduated college in 65, but I think the fact that you are a physician and you do work in pathology and how this led to the creation of this character.
Yeah, well, I went to school in Ohio, finished Miami University in Ohio, and I had a dual major.
I majored in English journalism and zoology.
So it turns out that I sort of brought all those things back into play when I developed the character for the novels that I'm working on that are the C.J.
Floyd mystery novels because I wanted to try and bring the English and journalism background that I had back into
into play but I didn't do it until I was in my late 40s because I didn't really get a chance because I was practicing as a pathologist all that time in between so I finally did I went back to Boston University and got a degree in creative writing from Boston University when I took a sabbatical from the university in the 1980s really tried to hone my skills in writing and I wrote a bunch of short stories after that and the stories
I'd received some notoriety, so I got my name out there as a short story writer.
And after that, I decided to write novels.
I sat down initially to write a straight medical thriller.
A la Robin Cook.
Yeah, in the Robin Cook or Michael Crichton mode.
But what I found out is I could not do it, and the reason was because it was too much like work.
I do a lot of recombinant DNA, molecular biology research at work, and I was just bringing that home at night and writing about it, and it bored me, and it was going to bore the reader.
That's a very interesting point, yeah.
What worked for me was the mystery, because I could put the mystery as the front story.
and make the so-called medical thriller the backstory.
And that's what works for me in each one of my novels.
But that also gives you the verisimilitude, you know, the stuff that you know.
Yeah.
It helps because I don't have to go...
spend countless hours in the library.
Great-looking things.
Yeah, well, I mean, the way you open the devil's red nickel, I mean, this is home turf for you.
Yeah, it starts in a morgue.
That's what I'm saying.
The biscuits are coming down.
It's a six-biscuit day.
Is that talk, by the way, biscuits?
They call them biscuits?
No, in fact, they don't do that.
In reality, I made that up.
That's fiction.
I didn't... They don't refer to bodies as biscuits.
But I thought it was an interesting first line, and so I sort of set it up that way.
And then I also started with a minor character to start the novel as opposed to a major character, but a very striking sort of minor character that would stay in your mind.
Okay.
Bob?
Yeah.
Okay, I interrupted, so why don't you continue with what you were saying earlier.
Yeah, so...
After I found out the medical thriller stuff wouldn't quite work, I put it as the back story, and as I said, that sort of formula for mystery and what the medical thriller subplot works for me, and so that's the way I've been writing the novels.
I came up with C.J.
Floyd as a central character because I knew a little bit about bail bonding.
I read about it, and it interested me, and so I came up with a character...
who would have a different slant than a typical private eye.
I think that's been done so much, I just didn't want to produce another person like that.
And I wanted somebody who was a little bit more offbeat.
So the central character is a bail bondsman and a bounty hunter, and he's a Vietnam vet who's
got that baggage of war to carry around with him.
He's a loner and a very principled man.
And, of course, the thing that I always get asked about is, you know, how did you come up with black characters or African-American characters?
Of course I did, because I'm black.
So I wanted to put those people in the lead story.
I wonder who'd ask that question.
I mean...
I wonder how it's like me coming up with a Greek character.
Yeah, right.
It would be like, why would you come up with a character that you had some familiarity with?
Especially the idiom, too.
But go ahead.
But anyway, I came up with him, and I wanted him to be the central lead role.
I wanted a guy who had some flaws, but a person who was very, very principled and really...
took the high road in defining for himself differences between right and wrong.
A person who was reticent about having relationships with women, but was the kind of person who could care deeply about other people.
So that's the way I came up with the idea for him.
It's worked for me so far.
Yeah, well, plus he can, the nature of his profession allows him to move freely, I think, between groups.
You know, if you're a cop, ostensibly, you do have, you know, Miranda warnings you have to give and stuff like that.
And a lawyer has been done and all this other stuff.
But this guy can really kind of move freely, I think.
Yeah, well, that was part of the reason I also chose him, because he can do that without somebody...
immediately slamming him in jail.
And they do have unbelievable powers as bail bondsmen that a lot of people don't know about.
They can handcuff you to the back of their pickup truck and take you right down to the jail.
Yeah, and they can cross state lines freely, too.
Oh, absolutely.
Absolutely.
As cops, you know, and they get in trouble every once in a while.
for nailing the wrong person.
And they've done that.
So how about the story?
You know, I mean, so you went back to school.
You've been practicing medicine now for, what, 25 years?
Yeah, 25 years.
But there's always, we have the storytelling aspect of it.
Where does that come from?
I mean, because obviously that's at the center of what you're doing here.
We can have all the...
all the detail in the world but you still have to have number one the character and number two the story. Yeah well I came up with sort of storytelling because lots of people in my family were storytellers. I had had uncles that used to love to tell stories, and many other people in my family where I grew up in Ohio and then Gary, Indiana were were farmers, mainly in Ohio.
And they would sit around and tell stories.
So I think that that's where that comes from.
What kinds of stories?
Family stories, oral tradition stories?
Yeah, a lot of them were just sort of oral tradition family stories.
Stories about the family and where they came from and where they worked and how they moved from North Carolina up into Ohio and became coal miners in West Virginia and Ohio.
And then how they became farmers and
I had an uncle, though, who's a famous chef.
No kidding.
Where was this?
In New York during the Harlem Renaissance.
And so they used to like to talk about how he ate himself to death.
You know, just tales like that.
Yeah.
And so I guess that's where it came from.
The other thing, the other place that the real...
background for storytelling and writing comes from is my parents were teachers, both of my parents, my mother and father, and they really were avid readers.
So people often seem to think that writers come from a background where they write all the time, and I just don't
find that to be true. I think it's much more people come right who come from a background where they read all the time. Well I couldn't agree more by the way. Uh that's that's just element of the new book that I'm writing. I'm really looking at the readers. No really? Yeah this well I'm writing about book culture you know uh, and all it's and all it's on the eve of a new millennium, you know the aspects, but you don't want to hear that stuff, but
But reading, of course, is elemental.
Now, tell me about your parents.
Where did they teach?
My father was a teacher, a high school teacher, and then a principal in Gary, Indiana, when I was growing up.
And my mother was a teacher, too.
And then she only taught a brief time, though, after my brother was born, or their second child.
Then she quit teaching to raise her family full-time.
But then my father went from being principal of a high school to move back to Ohio, back to Columbus, when I was out of college, and he became the assistant superintendent of schools for the state.
And so he was a man who was heavily into the educational system and a very literate man who really thought reading books
Very important, just as my mother did.
What was his name?
Robert.
Yeah, Robert Greer.
I'm a junior.
You're a junior?
Yeah.
Where did he go to school?
Went to a small black college in West Virginia called Bluefield State Teachers.
Bluefield?
That was back when the black colleges really were very separate and there were lots of them.
Well, it's when black people couldn't get into regular colleges.
Oh, absolutely.
And then he went on from there.
Then he went on to Ohio State and got his master's and Ph.D.
from Ohio State.
So that's the Ohio connection.
This is great because the Columbus Dispatch will use this story.
So that's wonderful.
Are your parents alive?
My dad's not.
My dad's dead.
And my mother's still alive, still lives in Columbus.
Oh, good.
What's your name?
Her name's Mary.
And
Mary Greer, does she use a middle name?
Yeah, she uses Angie.
That's what people have called her all her life.
So is it Mary Greer, you know, A-N-G-I-E?
Yeah.
Okay, good.
And she lives in Columbus?
Yeah, she lives in Columbus.
Any other family there?
Oh, yeah.
All my family on my mother's side live in Columbus.
She had seven brothers and sisters.
And they all still, the ones that are still alive live in Columbus.
They've always lived there all their lives.
So she's from Columbus.
Oh, yeah.
She's from there.
Okay.
So now let's talk about The Devil's Red Nickel.
Tell me a little bit about the titles of both your books.
Yeah.
Well, the titles that I choose are titles that all have something to do with American history.
And I think some people look at the titles and say, well, there's that word, the devil, trying to catch your eye.
But in reality, what I'm trying to catch is your conscience.
And the
The Devil's Hat Band, which is the first novel, comes from the historical element of barbed wire.
In the West, barbed wire in the 1870s and 60s was hated.
Ranchers didn't like it because it fenced off the West.
So they couldn't run their cattle anywhere they wanted and they couldn't get free eat.
They couldn't let them eat for free.
And so they hated barbed wire because it fenced off the West for them.
Can you say this as a rancher, by the way?
Yeah.
Oh, yeah.
I am a rancher.
Go ahead.
Continue.
So and then The Devil's Red Nickel, which the new novel, that title stems from a practice that was a practice in the 1950s in which the organized crime controlled
The jukebox industry.
So what they would do is they'd go to an establishment where jukeboxes were prominent as they were at that time.
And then they'd make the proprietor use red impregnated nickels or slugs, whichever one they wanted to use.
And then the proprietor would give those to the patrons.
The patrons would use those.
They'd play all the records.
And then they'd come back at the end of the month and they'd pull out all those slugs that were impregnated with the red dye or the red nickel and take a cut out of every one of those.
If you played one, you know, 10 times, then the organized crime got 80% of it.
You got 10, 20%.
So you'd get a penny or 20 cents maybe on the nickel.
And many may say, well, that's not very much.
It is if you're playing...
If you've got thousands and thousands of jukeboxes and they're playing thousands of records, then you can make a lot of money that way.
Wow, that's the way McDonald's makes money on hamburgers.
Absolutely.
They don't make money selling you one hamburger.
No, they don't.
Apparently when you decided that you wanted to write fiction, I mean, you didn't do it...
Hastily, I mean, it sounds to me like you really gave it a lot of thought, measured precisely how you were going to go about it.
I mean, you didn't go plunging into the writing of a book.
You went back to school.
Did school help you, by the way?
Yeah, school helped me a lot.
I learned in a very specific fashion, and I think everybody does.
A lot of people will say, well, writers learn in the, quote, what they call bohemian style.
They hang out with other writers, and they talk in coffee shops, and they discuss the world and the world of writing, and then out of that comes literature.
I don't learn in that.
No, but it's a good way to get grants.
It's a way to justify getting a grant, I think.
Well, I never have been.
Neither have I. We work for everything we get, I think.
Go ahead.
Somebody has to teach me something.
And whether it's the craft of writing or the craft of pathology or the craft of zoology or whatever the things I've tried to be involved in, I've had good teachers.
And so when I decided I really wanted to write seriously again, I figured out how I could go back to one of the creative writing programs where you could get a master's, which is one of the standard kind of education programs in the country.
get a good teacher who could try and help me become a better writer.
And so I did.
I went back to Boston University.
They had a good program.
And it's the program in which Leslie Epstein's the head.
And then Derek Walcott, who won the Nobel Prize for poetry two, three years ago, was the head of the poetry section.
So they had outstanding teachers.
And I just happened to go to there because I'd gone to professional school there.
Did you take some courses with Walcott?
Did I do one?
Did you take any courses with Walcott or Derek Walcott?
No, I didn't.
Actually, I didn't because what happened was the poetry and the fiction.
There were three segments to it, poetry, fiction, and drama.
And if you were a fiction writer major like me, you could cross over and take some poetry or drama.
And I did.
But Walcott's courses were so full that everybody signed up for them.
If you couldn't get there right at the beginning, you couldn't get them.
And so I never did.
I signed up for them and never could get in the course.
They say it's almost the same with, I mean, John Silver has really brought some extraordinary people over to BU, but it's almost impossible to get into their classes.
Yeah, that's true.
But anyway, go ahead.
I'm sorry.
So anyway, I was in that program.
Actually, the guy Epstein is just as interesting because he's the head of the fiction writing section, and he grew up in Hollywood.
His father and uncle wrote Casablanca.
Okay.
I think Mr. Smith Comes to Washington.
Some of those old famous classic movies were written by his uncle and father who were 18.
back when Warner and MGM, those studios, used to really have control of writers and actors and stuff.
And so he was a good teacher.
And so I learned from him, and I came back and started to write short stories after that.
This was actually 1989.
And my stories were better than they were before.
They were actually good enough to get published in some high-quality literary magazines.
What were some of the magazines?
A.T.N.I., which is a real high-profile magazine that comes out of Boston University, in fact.
I had stories published in Writers' Forum, which is a Western.
I know them.
And New Mexico Humanities Review and the Black American Literature Forum out of Indiana.
That's where you start.
Great, yeah.
Yeah, they were good, solid literary magazines out of high-profile universities.
So I got some luck with that, and that helped me because then my name became known, so I could get an agent.
Otherwise, it's real difficult to get an agent.
I know the drill.
Yeah.
So after I got, you know, with that short story background, I was able to get an agent, and then he was able to sell the first novel.
Who's the agent?
His name is Nat Sobel.
S-O-B-E-L.
Uh-huh.
Yeah, he's well known.
Yeah.
Okay.
Now, tell me a little bit.
You told me about the thought that went into the creation of the character.
Who do you see as your reader?
I think I want the reader to be exactly who I made C.J.
I want him to be the corollary of that.
I tried to make C.J.
Floyd every man.
I want the reader to be the same, either every man or every woman.
And by that I mean when I write novels, there seems to me to be a tendency among some of the ethnic writers.
And I don't know that this is true, but there's this idea that the work has to be exclusive, and it can only include a certain community.
And it's almost often what I would call inside writing.
And I don't write like that, don't have any intention to, and it would not interest me if you had to do that.
I want my work to be inclusive.
So when I write it, I'm writing for everyone.
So I'm not writing for black people only or for 45-year-old men only, like C.J.
Floyd happens to be, or for doctors only or for male bondsmen only.
I want it to touch a nerve in everyone.
And so that's my purpose.
And so the community that I want to read my work is the...
broad community of readers who can read it and say, I can relate to this.
This is interesting and enjoyable.
I can pick this up and it's a good read.
And I think, and I like these characters and I don't feel as though I'm kept out because it happens to be a world that revolves centrally around African-American characters.
I think Walter Mosley has succeeded spectacularly in precisely that kind of approach as well.
He has really penetrated all of the reading areas.
Well, Walter certainly opened the doors for people like me.
He was really the first person in the genre to really take off as a black writer.
But interesting enough, there were people before him.
Yeah, but not just the black writer, but I think the character.
Oh, I see what you mean.
The character is appealing.
And you're not writing in an idiom that is impenetrable for readers outside of this knit community.
You're certainly not using eubonics.
No, I don't think so.
and i'm saying that you know with a smile here but you know what i'm saying i mean you're not pitching your work to a specific uh group because it lets you know and if you did
That wouldn't be bad either.
I mean, African Americans.
I did an interview with Henry Louis Gates.
You know, I mean, African Americans buy a lot of books.
Oh, yeah, there's a huge community of readers out there.
I think what happened is the publishers finally figured it out.
That's helped as well.
I think that there was a figure that...
As a reading group, they accounted for 65 million books last year.
I didn't know that.
Good gracious.
Skip Gates has that in his book, The Anthology of African American Literature.
Yeah, I have that book.
That's a great book, by the way.
I did a column on that for Black History Month.
Spectacular book.
Matter of fact, I went over to Harvard and did an interview with him for it.
Let's see.
Tell me a little bit, so what's your schedule?
Are you planning to do like one a year or every other year or what?
Well, right now I'm on one a year.
The third one I'm working on right now, even on the road, I can't stop working on it because it's through July the 1st.
The third one's called The Devil's Backbone.
So The Devil's going to appear in the titles?
Yeah, The Devil will appear in this third book, The Devil's Backbone, and we know that title's already set.
And I just came out of New York.
with my agent and my editors yesterday.
No, yeah, yesterday.
And we'd had dinner the night before and really the thing that they're really interested in me doing is we've discussed writing a straight medical thriller.
And so the fourth book we're toying with whether or not it'll be a C.J.
Floyd mystery or whether it'll be a classic medical thriller.
And part of the reason they want that is because there's
Well, I know.
Big money.
I'd do it in a second if I could.
Yeah, I think that's where the big push is right now.
Whether I'm going to do it and write a straight medical thriller or use Henry Bale.
See, there's a pathologist in the novels who's a friend of CJ's who he was in Vietnam with.
I may push him to the forefront and make the book a medical thriller.
You might just create another series.
It's a debate.
We're trying to figure out which we're going to do, but that's what we're discussing right now for maybe the fourth book.
But that's great.
But you think that all the C.J.
Floyd mysteries will have devil in the title?
Well, the first three only.
After that, I'm not sure.
You're not going to bind yourself to it.
Yeah, I suspect only the first three they do.
You sound like Sue Grafton where you've got 26 letters in the alphabet to go through.
I don't think I can do 26 devils.
That's funny.
I'm a Holt author.
And they said for 1995, my book was the second best-selling book that Holt had.
I said, man, that's great.
They said, unfortunately, the number one was Sue Grafton.
Oh, my God.
She didn't have to look over her shoulder, I can tell you.
If you go in and look in the stores, I mean, she'll have the shelf, maybe a whole shelf, nothing but her books.
So, let's see.
How old are you, Bob?
I'm 53.
My age, precisely.
I'll be 54 next month.
You have a ranch, I think, you told me before.
Yeah, although we live in Denver.
My wife and I live there, and we've lived there, what, 23 years or so.
We've got a cattle ranch about 170 miles northwest of Denver, outside of Steamboat Springs, which is a ski area.
And it's a working cattle ranch.
We really run real cattle up there.
We have black baldy cattle that are crossed between Hereford and Angus, so you get a black cow with a white face.
And it's fun.
I like it.
I've always enjoyed the outdoors.
And as I said, there's some farming in my family background, so I learned to ride and rope and things like that when I was a teenager.
So I was lucky I could do those things when I moved out west.
How many head of cattle do you have to play?
How many head of cattle?
We run between 100 and 125 head at any one time.
So it's a cow-calf operation.
We have the mothers have the calves and then the calves get fat and we sell them in the fall.
So they're all being born right now.
We've got about half of the new calf herd is born because I just talked to my foreman last night.
Then we'll sell them in the fall, and actually the ranch is about 1,500 acres.
That's exciting.
Yeah, it's fun.
How often do you get up there?
I'm up there about every, I'm up there only once a month in the winter because of snows and my other jobs and responsibilities.
But in the summer, we're up there usually two weekends a month, and then we spend some time up there for vacation time.
Do you drive up?
Yeah, we drive.
It's three and a half hours.
You should fly.
Maybe this is flat land, right?
No place to land, probably.
Yep.
Not easy to land up there.
Well, listen, why don't you give me your phone number, you know, back home, if you don't mind.
And if there's any other questions, I'll give you a call.
Oh, yeah.
But I think we've got plenty of stuff here.
In Denver, it's 303.
303-320-6827, and that's work, and home is 303-871-0927.
Okay.
You did mention that you do a literary magazine.
You might give me a little something on that.
Oh, yeah, that's something I'm real proud of.
We started a literary magazine, and by me, I mean my wife and I started it.
We started it in 1986, so it's got a 10-year track record now.
It's called the High Plains Literary Review, and we publish short stories and essays, poetry, interviews with writers, and that sort of stuff, just like a sort of classic university literary magazine.
But we try and make it a cross between the Slicks and the Glossys and the university literary magazine.
So it's a cross between maybe Harper's and Indiana Review or something like that.
It's done good.
What's interesting is I really wanted the short stories to be the thing that drove it that we would really be most proud of.
And we have been because we've had lots of short stories that have been selected as never as
Boy, I take it for an O. Henry Award.
We've had an O. Henry Award-winning show of stories.
But in Best American Show of Stories, we get mentioned in the back all the time in the top 100, but we've never really had one in there.
But our essays, two years in a row, Robert Atwood had just called me about a week ago and said,
You've got another essay that won Best American Essays.
Nothing wrong with that.
No, we've gotten two in a row.
That's really a feather in our cap, so we're very proud of that.
And how often do you publish?
Three times a year.
That's a lot of work, I'll bet.
Yeah, I've got good people helping me, though.
I've got some real top-notch fiction and poetry writers who help.
And do you circulate it?
How is the circulation?
Circulation's about 1,600.
That's pretty good.
Which is good for a literary magazine, but certainly not, you know, they don't
sell like books.
No, but they get around.
They get around.
They get to where they have to get around to.
And if you get a good reputation, then you get good writers.
You'll have to send us something.
I'd love to.
You know, I'm planning to come out to Denver at some point for this new book I'm working on.
Did you mention that you're friendly with John Dunning?
Oh yeah, Dunning's a friend of mine.
I'd love to talk to him for this new book I'm writing.
I think I can get him probably through
Warner, isn't he still with Warner Books?
He's Scribner.
Scribner, that's okay, good, I know.
But if you need some help in trying to get him, just let me know, because I know John well.
I'd like to talk to him.
I'm sure he knows my book.
Yeah, your book's going to be reviewed.
I do book reviews for NPR.
Really?
Yeah.
That book is the second, say, the next.
I've got one book.
You're kidding me.
Yeah.
I'm going to do it.
I do it myself.
I pick the books.
So it's going to be not this book.
I do one on the 21st.
Well, aren't you sweet?
The 21st, I'm doing something.
a book about, believe it or not, about horses and stuff.
Oh, that sounds good.
Then the next one, then the next turnaround is, I think, the 8th of, what's the next one, of May, because, see, I got, I should have done my, my program on the 8th of this one.
Uh-huh.
So then the 8th of May, that's, that's the book I'm doing.
Good.
And I haven't even read it.
You'll enjoy it.
I've only seen it, you know, when we looked at the book.
You got a copy?
Oh, yeah, I've got a copy.
Because I'd make sure I had my publishers.
Give me your address so I can send you a copy of this piece, and I'll let you know what papers it runs into.
Okay.
It's 180.
180.
Yeah, Adams.
A-D-A-M-S.
Uh-huh.
Suite 250.
Suite 250?
Yeah.
Denver?
80206.
You know what, Nick, though?
I want a book that's signed.
I've got a book, but I don't have a book that's signed.
Well, why don't I send you a book that's signed?
Of course.
But what I'll probably put in the package is this book that you signed and sent back to me.
Okay.
All right.
And then do they have the...
Do they still have a press kit and all that junk with it or not?
I'll get you one.
Because our stuff is done, and it's three minutes, and it's good.
Well, there were some wonderful reviews of my book.
Michael Derter of the Washington Post, their Pulitzer Prize winning.
He gave it the best review, a full-page review.
The Times gave it a full-page review.
It's had great reviews.
I mean, I was on Brian Lamb's show, which, Christ, I don't need to tape record this.